3.1	Introduction- 
In previous unit, we have studied diversification of rural economic activities which consists livestock economics, problems of marketing, white revolution, fishery and poultry. Besides this, we have studied issues and problems in rural industrialization as well as rural infrastructure. In this unit, we will study the resource and efficiency in traditional agriculture, production function analysis in agriculture, factor combination and resource substitution, cost and supply curves, theoretical and empirical findings of size of farm and laws of returns, technical change and agricultural productivity. 
3.2 Analysis of the Unit: 
In this unit, we will study the agricultural production and productivity, production function analysis, farm size and laws of returns. Besides, farm budgeting and cost concepts as well as technical change and agricultural productivity is assessed.
3.2.1 Agricultural Production:
Resource and Efficiency in Traditional Agriculture:
Today in India, as in many other developing countries with a rich agricultural tradition of their own, the words ‘improved agriculture’ and ‘progressive agriculture’ have become synonymous with the spread of HYVs grown with ever-increasing doses of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Wherever the new crop varieties have spread, time-honoured crop rotations, inter-cropping patterns and other important features of traditional agriculture have been harshly uprooted. 
At the back of this trend, and the official policies which support it, is the belief that traditional agriculture is ‘backward’ and incapable of meeting the need of increasing population.
1.	Traditional Implements:  The existing ploughs and other implements used by the farmers were useless and ready to be replaced. The native cultivator had ‘improved’ ploughs he could dispense with the many ploughings which he gives to the land.
2.	Irrigation System: An important agent of traditional Indian agriculture was the well-developed irrigation system. Irrigation by wells is at once the most widely distributed system, and also the one productive of the finest examples of careful cultivation. Further, as regards wells, one cannot help being struck by the skill with which a supply of water is first found by the native cultivators, then by the construction of the wells, the kinds of wells and their suitability to the surroundings and means of the people; also by the various devices for raising water, each of which has a distinct reason for its adoption, but efficiency of traditional irrigation system was less productive. 
3.	Crop rotation system:  Another important aspect of traditional agriculture was that of the scientific rotation system of crop cultivation. Frequently more than one crop at a time may be seen occupying the same ground but one is very apt to forget that this is really an instance of rotation being followed. Now- a -days mono crop culture has been introduced, it increase the productivity of land and earn market surplus. 
4.	Soil-mixing practices:  Mixing is not unknown in India. The addition changes the consistence of the sand, so that it becomes better suited for sugar cane and other garden crops rose under irrigation. The cultivator appreciates the value of tank silt and in those districts where these water reservoirs are common they are cleaned out with the utmost care and regularly each year. The silt which has collected in these tanks being the washings of village sites and cultivated fields, has some manorial value, and applied as it is at the rate of 40 bullock cart loads or more per acre, adds considerably to the body of the soil.
5.	Grain-storage practices: Foodgrain storage of Indian farmers is no less glowing. Indian farmers are great adepts in storing grain, and will turn out of rough earthen pits, after 20 years, absolutely uninjured. They know the exact state of ripeness to which grain should be allowed to stand in different seasons; in other words under different meteorological conditions, to ensure its keeping when thus stored; and equally the length of time that, under varying atmospheric conditions, it should lie upon the open threshing floor to secure the same object.
6.	 Scientists Farmer: In the Chhatisgarh region has revealed the high level of skills of the farmers of remote tribal villages still untouched by the official development programmes. Tribal communities still lead a life of their own; they were taking comparable and even larger yields from indigenous rice varieties, compared to the HYVs being spread officially in other parts of the state. Another revelation was the very large number of rice varieties being grown by the farmers, who possessed detailed knowledge of each of their properties. Some of those varieties were remarkable for their high yields, some for their supreme cooking qualities, some for their aroma, and some for other cherished qualities.
7.	Grazing land: Traditionally, man, animals, trees, grass lands and agricultural fields were inseparable and harmonious components of a single system. The villager looked after the trees on his fields and also contributed to the maintenance of the community grazing land. Farmer looked after the animals owned by him, sometimes with the assistance of a grazing hand and cultivated the fields owned by him, with or without hired labour or share croppers. Meanwhile their soil and water conservation properties were beneficial for the villagers and contributed to maintaining the fertility of agricultural fields, as well providing shade during the summer season. 
8.	Husbandry:  Cattle provided milk and milk products and contributed to the nutritional content of the villagers' diet. Cattle dung provided organic fertilizers for the fields, while the poultry provided eggs and meat. The skins of dead cattle were used for making footwear and other leather products-all such activity being carried out in the village. Not least, bullocks ploughed the fields.
9.	Crop Management:  The numerous varieties of crops being grown in traditional agriculture, it should then make good quality seeds available to the villagers. Better field preparation and help with manuring, sowing operations, crop management and with post harvest storage will lead to better quality of crops as well as yields. 
10.	New agricultural technology: New agricultural technology in the form of tractors and fertilizers will again benefit the richer farmers, who will therefore be able to increase their agricultural production and cash receipts. On the other hand, their dependence on organic manure and bullocks is reduced, so that their requirement for fodder becomes less. All those factors may lead them to neglect the growth and proper maintenance of grazing lands. 
11.	 Water Use: The adoption of flat rate pricing for agricultural power is cause for this perverse state of affairs. Under this system, a farmer pays a fixed price per horsepower per month for electricity use. Therefore the marginal cost of pumping water is zero. This leads to energy wastage, over-pumping and inefficient selection of crops. Flat rate pumping also masks the true cost of power to farmers. The tariff structure and the poor combination of technology and management are responsible for water loss, unsustainable
exploitation of groundwater and the high energy losses associated with the distribution and end-use of electricity in irrigation water pumping.
12.	 Energy losses: Significant energy losses are associated with the distribution of electricity and in the poor selection, installation, maintenance and operation of the electrical motor pump system. A vicious cycle operates two subsystems in tandem: the electrical distribution system and the water pumping system. This vicious cycle comprises three sub-cycles: The technology sub-cycle, the financial sub-cycle and the socioeconomic sub-cycle.
Production Function Analysis in Agriculture:
Production Function:
 Production function is the creation of utility and units of values; it is the relationship between inputs and outputs. It is a technological relation showing, for a give state of technological knowledge, how much can produced with given amounts of inputs. Production function expresses the technological or engineering relationship between supplied by factors and outputs. Production is the function of land, labour, capital, organization, technology, enterprise and government contribution. It represents production efficiency achieved with the help of least-cost combinations of inputs or factors.
In the words of Stigler: “The production function is in fact the economist’s summary of the technical engineers’ knowledge.”
“Production function describes the laws of proportion, that is, the transformation of factor inputs, into products of any particular time period. It thus represents the technology and technically the most efficient method of production”
Diminishing Returns in Agriculture:
The law of diminishing returns is a part of the law of variable proportions. It is regarded as the ‘long term law of agriculture’- in fact long term law of life itself. That the law of diminishing returns should apply ultimately is not unknown to anyone. 
There are limits to the extent to which one factor of production can be substituted for another. The elasticity of substitution between factors is not infinite. If all factors are kept constant and only more water is supplied, unlimited output at increasing returns cannot be expected for ever. The same can be said about the application of fertilizers or pesticides or high yielding variety of seeds. Land becomes the greatest limiting factor or at least its fertility.
Following are the important characteristics of diminishing returns in agriculture:
1.	Diminishing returns emerge because of the declining fertility or the original state of the land.
2.	Diminishing returns are due to limited substitutability of the factors of production. According to Mrs. Joan Robinson the elasticity of substitution between factors is not infinite.
3.	Diminishing returns are obtained when the scale of operation is not increased but when only one variable input is changed while the quantities of other inputs are kept constant.
4.	The total production increases but the incremental production becomes smaller and smaller due to marginal productivity of the land declines and later on the average productivity also declines.
5.	Diminishing returns may be obtained after increasing or constant returns and become the natural outcome of agricultural operations.
Increasing Returns in Agriculture:
This simply means that increasing outputs can be obtained with the same inputs or that the rising inputs bring more than proportionate outputs. This relationship better has to be in physical terms and not merely in revenue terms. Increasing revenue cost ratio can be a function of better terms of trade only.
Increasing returns are obtained when diseconomies are less than the economies of production. If the indivisibilities can be overcome, economies of scale are reaped. Large size farms can afford to use machines and big farm machines require large size farms. 
Generally, it will not be sufficient to employ additional labour or capital only to obtain increasing returns. In the long run the sizes of all factors of production and all inputs have to be increased. If the same land can be used for raising two or three crops it is land augmenting technique. Land augmenting and save techniques help in realizing increasing economic returns, including higher production. Higher yield and outputs take us towards increasing returns.
Higher economic returns require several other things also. Optimum sized land holding, availability of credit at the right time so that the real inputs can be procured at the right time, extension facilities, technologies increase the production. Subsidies and price support provide incentives to the farmers for better production. 
Constant Returns in Agriculture:
 It means each marginal unit of a variable resource adds the same amount of the output to the total production. Though ‘diminishing marginal productivity’ is the rule, constant productivity is frequently observed when no resource is fixed and all are increased together in the same proportion. For example, another acre may be as productive as the first with same inputs. If one acre of wheat requires 20 man-hours of labour, 30 kg of seed and 13 inches of irrigation water and yields 10 quintals of wheat, the second acre will require additional 20 man-hours of labour, 30 kg of seed and 13 inches of irrigation water and will also yield 10 quintals of wheat. The second acre is just as productive. The marginal or added production from each increase in resource input is the same: this is a case of constant productivity.
Another case is when one or more resources are fixed but have excess capacity. For example, family labour or a farmer may not be fully employed. A storage godown may have surplus capacity. A tractor may be big enough to control 50 acres holding but the farmer may have only 27 acres. If variable input is added to such a resource-mix situation, constant returns may result.
Under constant productivity, each unit input increase is just as profitable as another. Under such conditions the profit rule is: If production is profitable on first unit, keep producing till the constant returns hold. Do not produce at all, if production is not profitable on first unit. In a sense, follow the same principle i.e. continue adding the variable resource to the fixed resource(s) as long as the return is greater than the added costs.
Limits on constant returns are reached as some of the factors become fixed. If nothing else becomes fixed, management becomes a fixed resource. The productivity of one resource depends on the amount of the others with which it is used. For example, if capital is fixed at a low level for the farm as a whole, labour productivity will be lower. Since the productivity of one resource depends on the amount of other resources with which it is combined, farmers having different quantities of land, capital, labour and management will have different programmes. 
Factor Combination and Resource Substitution:
For cultivation of agriculture, various inputs or practices can be substituted in varying degrees for producing a given output. A producer has to choose a particular combination of inputs, which would be most profitable or more income generated.
For produce the certain level of output, farmer has to decide upon the least cost-combination of inputs. There are large number of alternatives for performing different farm operations and obtaining output through different combinations of inputs.  For ex ample -  1. Use of bullocks vs. tractor for a given size of a farm,   2. Harvesting of crops by machines vs. by manual labour, 3. Milking machines vs. hand milking for a given herd of cows,  4. Wheat bhusa, green fodder and grains-mix in dairy feeds, 5. Combinations of potash, phosphate, and nitrogen in fertilizers for crops.
A number of combinations of concentrates and green fodder, for example, can be used in producing a given amount of milk. Forage usually substitutes at diminishing rate for grain. Problem here is to find the least cost combination of fodders and grains, milk production remaining the same a combination of fodders and grains which, cost remaining the same, will yield maximum output of milk.
Cost minimization will not depend only upon the cost of inputs and prices of products but also on the rate of substitution. For example, if labour costs less relative to cost of performing the operations by machines, costs may be lowered by substituting labour for machinery. If machine costs are low relative to labour, labour should get substituted with machine operations
Cost and Supply Curves:
Supply means the quantity of a good or service that a producer is willing and able to supply in to the market at a given price in a given time period. Normally as the market price of a commodity increase, producers will expand their supply onto the market. There are three main reasons why supply curves for most products slope upwards from left to right giving a positive relationship between the market price and quantity supplied. When the market price raises an increase in consumer demand, it becomes more profitable for businesses to increase their output. 
Higher prices send signals to firms that they can increase their profits by satisfying demand in the market. When output rises, a firm's costs may rise, therefore a higher price is needed to justify the extra output and cover these extra costs of production. Higher prices make it more profitable for other firms to start producing that product so we may see new firms entering the market leading to an increase in supply available for consumers to buy. For these reasons we find that more is supplied at a higher price than at a lower price. 
The supply curve shows a relationship between the price of a good or service and the quantity a producer is willing and able to sell in the market. 
3.2.2 Size of Farm and Law of Returns – Theoretical and Empirical Findings
The efficient scale of farm operation depends both on narrowly-defined scale economies in production, essentially a matter of irregularity of inputs and specialization of labour and on scale-related transaction costs in input and output markets, including both information costs and scale economies in transport and marketing.  
These give rise to economies of scale, so it could be that the mechanization of farming that results from a rise in the price of labour relative to capital would lead to such a large increase in the minimum inputs that the family farm would become obsolete. Studies of the UK and US quoted by BDF suggest that the average cost minimizing scale might be about 50 ha. in British mixed farms or as much as 250 ha. in cash-grain farms in Illinois, but as is pointed out there, such large-scale farms 'are still managed largely by family labour' . Whether lumpy inputs will have a substantial influence on optimal scale in a given case depends on whether a rental market exists in those inputs, which is itself dependent partly on whether processes are e.g because of climatic homogeneity, synchronized across farms. In the United States, for instance, there is an active rental market in combine harvesters, which follow the seasons across the country. 
Transaction costs associated with the care, maintenance and transport of irregular inputs may be such as to inhibit renting, with not only a potential impact on optimal scale but also on mode of organization of farming, which may be essentially driven by the accumulation of wealth in the form of these inputs. 
Such a measure not only allows for transaction costs and scale economies, but also for the possibility that optimal factor proportions vary with scale, which would in general imply that narrowly- defined scale economies would vary according to the factor-proportions ray along which they were being measured.
Similarly, it was suggested in a study of rice farming in one area of Andhra Pradesh that the ownership of irregular irrigation equipment was determining farm size, at a level above that of the family farm. An extra element in this case was that the farms were almost all owner-operated, suggesting the absence of secure long-term land rental contracts that might allow tenants to amortize investments in immobile, irregular equipment. Yet it may be that choice of technique rather than mode of production will adjust. Examples are the emergence of hand and treadle pumps in Bangladesh and of bamboo tube wells in India, where the initially-introduced tube well and pump technologies had favoured larger scale.
Management skill is another irregular input that may account for scale economies. Moreover good farm managers are likely to find it optimal to manage larger farms than poor managers. To the extent that the availability of new seeds, fertilizers and pesticides, together with the possibility of obtaining credit to pay for them, has increased, one expects the returns to scarce managerial skill to have risen, which is lent support by evidence that the impact of schooling on agricultural productivity is substantially higher in such modernizing environments than in traditional ones. Where this has in fact induced the acquisition of greater skills, one would expect optimal scale to have risen. Against this, some technological advance may favour local knowledge sufficiently that efficiency demands more intensive managerial input, leading to smaller scale.
